---
title: Selfhosting and your Homeserver - E01 - Don't hate the Cloud, become the Cloud
description: Eliminate dependencies from the widespread cloud and acquire knowledge during the process. This article explores how to get started with self-hosting, looking at different approaches with different goals and requirements. 
date: 2023-10-15
tags:
  - linux
  - server
  - proxmox
  - ubuntu
  - debian
  - zfs
  - cloud
  - selfhosting
  - homeserver
  - docker
  - container
  - backups
  - hosting
  - raspberry
  - freebsd
  - truenas
---

Recently, I have received numerous questions from friends and colleagues about my personal home network and server setup.
This article aims to provide insight into my setup and its underlying philosophy.

## General Philosophy and Approach

Your requirements and setup will depend heavily on your chosen approach and philosophy.
Therefore, I would like to start by giving an overview of my choices for the above.

### Set and forget

I aimed to establish a server setup that necessitates initial development and configuration, yet demands minimal ongoing maintenance.
My hectic lifestyle, dominated by extensive work and study commitments, compelled me to avoid any manual intervention required to keep the server functional and accessible, particularly when it involved troubleshooting bugs late at night.
This decision will reflect in the following setup description and examples.

### K.I.S.S.

K.I.S.S. - or Keep It Simple Stupid, reflects a way of solving problems and finding appropriate solutions.
Generally, I aimed to use simple and established solutions, avoiding unnecessary complexity.

### Unix

_Do exactly one thing and do it well._
This influential philosophy has had a significant impact on software engineering as a whole.
I have definitely not strictly adhered to the Unix philosophy, but it can serve as a useful guide for tool selection.
If I haven't utilized it enough, perhaps it can assist with your own tool choices.

### Security

Staying true to Security by Design and my chosen profession, I have incorporated security considerations into my tool selection and server architecture design process.
When dealing with self-managed and hosted services, as well as occasionally self-developed ones, that are connected to and exposed on the Internet, it is crucial to prioritize security.
In the following I will identify the pain points and potential security issues that may arise and provide guidance on how to manage and address them.

## Available Approaches

In this chapter, I will outline various generally available approaches for setting up your own server and present arguments for my chosen solution.
The discussion will intentionally exclude the option of renting servers (Let's be realistic, if the server is not physically located in your home, then it is not *your* server.).  
Overall, two primary "external" factors are at play that limit and determine outcomes: **time** and **cost**.
Adding to this, the planned usage and required resources determine the available options.
It is important to consider both of these factors before settling on a general approach.

Therefore, let us explore the available options and my prior considerations for hosting my own server.  
I first established my server in 2019, which will be relevant in regards to ARM boards.  
Additionally, I was looking for a system that could handle a SATA hard drive based raid system that would accommodate all of my network storage as well as backup needs.
Furthermore, I wanted the ability to self host all relevant services and my own projects, whilst having some headroom to be future proof and/or to allow for easy upgrades in the future.
I aimed to create a dependable, relatively compact, and noiseless server.
Being quiet is no longer as crucial now that I have moved out of my one-bedroom flat, but it remains a factor that students should consider.  
Price-wise, I was not restricted as I preferred a one-time purchase of a good quality product over multiple cheaper ones/upgrades.  
However, what constrained me particularly, and even concurrently, owing to Germany's status as the world leader in electric rates is the power consumption both during idle and usage.
A possible future enhancement would be the capability to power the server entirely through solar energy and a rechargeable battery during the nighttime.

### ARM based Development Board / Pi
Raspberry Pis, along with their counterparts and companions, present a cost-effective method for creating a basic Linux-based server or NAS solution.
Not only are they inexpensive, with the 8gb model priced below 100€, but they also consume minimal power during both idle and operation.
This is particularly evident with the latest generation (Pi 5), which not only delivers impressive performance but also supports the attachment of PCIe devices, enabling the use of SATA for HDDs instead of USB for the first time.  
They can also run a fully-fledged Linux operating system, but are limited by their platform, as support for ARM does not match that of their classic x86 counterparts, particularly when using containers.
The subpar Software support paired with the low performance (back in 2019 the 3b+ was the top of the line model) as well as their lack of SATA support made the decision against this candidate clear for me.

### That old Laptop of yours
The main advantage of this solution is its zero acquisition costs.
However, it is important to ensure that the laptop has sufficient performance for your specific use case and keep in mind that it may not support multiple SATA devices, whilst a minimum of three would be ideal.  
Regarding Security, the lack of Hardware exemplarily microcode updates for the CPU are a potential problem to be aware of.
Apart from that, if you happen to have a compatible device and it meets your requirements, then this is the optimal choice for you.
Moreover, the cost of electricity consumption will be considerably lower than purchasing new, lower-wattage components for a long time.
In general, except for NICs, most laptops should be able to feasibly run a Linux or BSD distribution without issue regarding the hardware.
KISS - the easiest solution is generally the best.

### Just buying that NAS

### Your own real Server

#### Used Server Equipment

#### Purpose Built Server

## Choice of Operating Systems + Core Tools

### BSD
-> BSD based NAS Systems as TrueNAS +++ZFS
-> potentially not full compatibility to classic linux programms
-> for me learning Linux Server Administrations was key, good choice nontheless

### Linux
when using pi, sticking to armbian or comparable
LTS -> no exploration of all available distros sticking to what is tried and tested and known by me 

#### Debian
OMV

#### Ubuntu
ZFS

#### Proxmox
why not debian+ubuntu 

### Windows
Nah just joking, please under no circumstances ever do that...

## Core Tools
Let us now talk about software, as we have already touched on this point with some options for NAS/server-oriented distributions.


[//]: # (**Want to know how to proceed? )
[//]: # (To learn more about the use cases and related software for hosting your own server, please read the [next episode]&#40;/blog/linux/server/selfhosting-and-your-homeserver/E02&#41;** )

---
<a href="https://github.com/openzfs/zfs/issues/15276" target="_blank">[1] - Issue#15276, openzfs/zfs</a>  
<a href="https://git.proxmox.com/?p=pve-kernel.git;a=commit;h=9ba0dde971e6153a12f94e9c7a7337355ab3d0ed" target="_blank">[2] - projects/pve-kernel.git, Proxmox</a>  
<a href="https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/linux/+bug/2034745" target="_blank">[3] - Bug#2034745, Ubuntu</a>  
<a href="https://forum.proxmox.com/threads/slow-zfs-encryption-will-we-get-a-fix-for-avx-avx2-not-being-selected.133681/" target="_blank">[4] - Forumpost, Proxmox</a>  
